.\" Wolfson manual page
.\" Run with: man ./docs/wolfson.1
.TH WOLFSON 1 "April 2026" "Wolfson" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
wolfson \- interactive jazz improvisation system
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B python main.py
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBWolfson\fR listens to live bass input over MIDI, segments it into
phrases, and responds in real time with generated saxophone lines.
The musical conversation is governed by a 5-minute structural arc that
moves through five stages — sparse, building, peak, recapitulation,
and resolution — modulating harmonic mode, rhythmic density, register
contrast, and generation temperature as the performance develops.
.PP
The system uses an LSTM trained on jazz solo transcriptions from the
Weimar Jazz Database.  At each phrase boundary the arc controller
determines harmonic context (free, modal, chord progression, or pedal
tone), contour target, energy arc, motif recall strength, and swing
bias, then passes these as generation parameters to the phrase
generator.  Generated phrases are post-processed with phrase-shape
dynamics (melodic peak accent and end taper) before playback.
.PP
During the sparse opening stage Wolfson plays the first few bass
phrases back literally — transposed to the saxophone register by the
nearest octave shift, preserving every interval and rhythm exactly.
This makes the call-and-response relationship immediately audible
before the generative voice takes over.  After the echo budget is
exhausted (default: 4 exchanges) Wolfson begins generating its own
material, drawing on the echoed phrases as seed motifs.
.PP
By default the arc clock starts on the first incoming bass phrase,
not at launch time, so the script may be started well in advance of
the performance.  Pass \fB\-\-auto\-start\fR to begin the arc immediately
on launch instead.
.SH OPTIONS
.SS "Input / tempo"
.TP
.B \-\-bpm \fIBPM\fR
Starting tempo for self-play mode (default: 120).
In live mode tempo is estimated continuously from bass note onsets;
this option has no effect.
.SS "Performance modes"
.TP
.B \-\-auto\-start
Start the arc immediately on launch so the sax plays proactively
before the bassist plays anything.  Without this flag the arc starts
lazily on the first bass phrase.  Use this to open the performance
with Wolfson improvising first; join in whenever you are ready.
The first proactive phrase fires approximately 3 seconds after launch.
.TP
.B \-\-self\-play
Autonomous mode.  The system feeds its own sax output back as bass
input, creating a continuous generative loop seeded from a short
D minor pentatonic motif.  No MIDI hardware required.
.TP
.B \-\-trade
Beat-matching mode.  The sax response is capped to the same length
in beats as the incoming bass phrase, enabling natural trading of
2s, 4s, or 8s.
.TP
.B \-\-loop
Loop continuously.  After each 5-minute arc completes, phrase memory,
arc state, and harmony are reset and a new arc starts automatically.
Phrase memory and riff state are cleared between iterations so that
successive users begin with a clean slate.  Use \fBCtrl\-C\fR to stop.
.TP
.B \-\-loop\-gap \fISECS\fR
Pause between arc loops in seconds (default: 8).
.SS "Generation"
.TP
.B \-\-temperature \fIT\fR
Offset added to the arc's per-stage generation temperature
(default: 0.0, i.e. arc defaults unchanged).
Temperature controls how peaked or flat the LSTM's sampling
distribution is.  Positive values produce more adventurous, less
predictable lines; negative values produce more idiomatic, conservative
lines that stay closer to the most probable jazz vocabulary.
Arc stage defaults range from 0.70 (resolution) to 1.05 (peak);
the practical range for this offset is approximately \-0.3 to +0.3.
Temperature is clamped to a minimum of 0.1.
.TP
.B \-\-riff\-prob \fIP\fR
Self-play only.  Probability (0\(en1) that each feedback cycle
re-injects the previous bass phrase rather than the latest sax output,
simulating a repeating riff or ostinato (default: 0.0).
After three or more consecutive identical phrases the sax enters
development mode: motivic strength is boosted and contour is pushed
away from neutral.  Repeat detection uses fuzzy pitch-class matching,
tolerating octave shifts, one extra or missing note, and one wrong note.
Riff state resets cleanly between \fB\-\-loop\fR iterations.
.TP
.B \-\-sax\-riff\-prob \fIP\fR
Probability (0\(en1) that the sax replays its previous phrase verbatim
instead of generating a new response (default: 0.0).
The reverse of \fB\-\-riff\-prob\fR: the sax insists on a phrase while
the bassist is free to develop underneath.
After two consecutive replays the sax shifts to development mode,
generating a variation of the repeated phrase with boosted motivic
strength and a directed contour, so it is heard to evolve its
insistence rather than loop indefinitely.
During the peak stage replays are capped at 1 to limit harmonic drift
in the chord progression.
If \fB\-\-chord\-hint\fR is active, replays use the chord from the
phrase's original generation rather than the freshly-advanced harmony,
so the same melody always sounds against the same chord.
The console logs \fI[sax riff \(muN]\fR on each replay and
\fI[sax riff \(muN develop ...]\fR when development kicks in.
Works in both live-bass and self-play modes.
.TP
.B \-\-motif\-displacement
Randomly shift the motif injection point by 0.5 or 1.0 beats each
phrase (chosen independently per phrase).
The motif bias is suppressed until the accumulated beat count reaches
the offset, placing the recurring interval figure on a later metric
position — an eighth-note or quarter-note displacement is enough to
move it from downbeat to offbeat.
Off by default; enable for live testing of rhythmic displacement.
.SS "Display"
.TP
.B \-\-dashboard
Enable the full-screen rich terminal dashboard: arc progress bar,
stage name with time remaining, BPM, phrase count, harmony mode,
scale source, contour, velocity, and last-phrase note chips.
Recommended as a personal monitor while performing.
.TP
.B \-\-web
Serve a mobile-optimised audience display page on the local network
(default port 5000).  Audience members on the same WiFi open
\fIhttp://<host-ip>:5000\fR in their phone browser — no app required.
The page shows arc progress, stage, BPM, phrase count, harmony, scale,
contour, velocity, and last-phrase notes.  At arc completion a
performance-summary overlay is displayed automatically.
.TP
.B \-\-web\-port \fIPORT\fR
Port for the audience web display (default: 5000).
On macOS, port 5000 may be occupied by AirPlay Receiver;
use \-\-web\-port 8080 in that case.
.TP
.B \-\-tunnel
Open a Cloudflare tunnel so the audience display is reachable from
any network, including eduroam and other institutional networks that
block inbound connections.  Requires \fBcloudflared\fR to be installed:
.RS
.B brew install cloudflare/cloudflare/cloudflared
.RE
The public URL is printed at startup alongside the local URL.
.SS "OSC output"
.TP
.B \-\-osc\-host \fIHOST\fR
Enable UDP/OSC output to \fIHOST\fR.  Every phrase emits a burst of
messages covering arc stage and progress, tempo, harmony mode, scale
source, contour, velocity, and pitch list.  Suitable for driving
visualisations in TouchDesigner, Max/MSP, Processing, or Ableton Live.
.TP
.B \-\-osc\-port \fIPORT\fR
OSC UDP port (default: 9000).
.SS "Chord hint"
.TP
.B \-\-chord\-hint
Play a short voiced 4-note chord on a separate MIDI channel at the
start of each phrase (whether triggered by bass or by the sax playing
proactively), making the internal harmonic state directly audible.
The chord sounds for 1.5 beats at velocity 70 then releases.
In tonal sections (peak, resolution) a tertian voicing is used
(root, 3rd, 5th, 7th); in modal sections (building, recapitulation)
the chord is voiced as four stacked perfect 4ths, matching the
quality-neutral floating character of modal playing.
On sax riff replays the chord hint repeats the original chord rather
than advancing to the new harmony (see \fB\-\-sax\-riff\-prob\fR).
No chord is emitted during the sparse stage (free/chromatic mode).
Useful for live testing and rehearsal.
.TP
.B \-\-comp\-channel \fICH\fR
MIDI channel for chord hint playback (default: 3).
Route this channel to a piano or pad voice in your DAW.
.SH "MIDI CHANNELS"
.TS
l l l.
Channel	Content	Suggested voice
_
1	Odd-numbered sax phrases (1, 3, 5 …)	Alto sax / higher register
2	Even-numbered sax phrases (2, 4, 6 …)	Tenor sax / lower register
3	Chord hints (\fB\-\-chord\-hint\fR)	Piano or pad
.TE
.PP
In live-bass mode all sax phrases are sent on channel 1.
Channel numbers are configurable in \fIconfig.py\fR
(\fBSELF_PLAY_CH_A\fR, \fBSELF_PLAY_CH_B\fR).
.SH "PERFORMANCE ARC"
.TS
l l l l.
Time	Stage	Harmonic mode	Character
_
0:00\(en1:00	sparse	free	Chromatic; no harmonic constraints
1:00\(en2:30	building	modal	Modal groove warming up; P4/P5 leaps
2:30\(en3:30	peak	progression	ii\(enV\(enI / blues; maximum activity
3:30\(en4:30	recapitulation	modal	Lyrical return; motifs recalled
4:30\(en5:00	resolution	pedal	Sustained; slow; sax plays final phrase
.TE
.PP
By default the arc starts on the first incoming bass phrase.
With \fB\-\-auto\-start\fR or \fB\-\-self\-play\fR the arc starts immediately
on launch.
The algorithm is calibrated for tempos of 55 BPM and above; below this
threshold note-timing calculations become unreliable.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Live performance, basic:
.B python main.py
.TP
Wolfson opens the performance (sax plays first):
.B python main.py \-\-auto\-start
.TP
Live performance with dashboard and audience display:
.B python main.py \-\-dashboard \-\-web \-\-web\-port 8080
.TP
Live performance on eduroam with public tunnel:
.B python main.py \-\-web \-\-web\-port 8080 \-\-tunnel
.TP
Live performance with chord hint for rehearsal:
.B python main.py \-\-chord\-hint
.TP
Sax insistence — sax sometimes repeats to invite bassist to develop:
.B python main.py \-\-sax\-riff\-prob 0.4
.TP
Beat-matching (trading 2s and 4s):
.B python main.py \-\-trade
.TP
Self-play at 90 BPM with riff simulation:
.B python main.py \-\-self\-play \-\-bpm 90 \-\-riff\-prob 0.6
.TP
Self-play with elevated temperature:
.B python main.py \-\-self\-play \-\-bpm 90 \-\-temperature 0.15
.TP
Installation mode (continuous loop, audience display):
.B python main.py \-\-self\-play \-\-loop \-\-loop\-gap 10 \-\-web
.TP
Rhythmic displacement of motif figures:
.B python main.py \-\-motif\-displacement
.TP
OSC output to TouchDesigner on localhost:
.B python main.py \-\-osc\-host 127.0.0.1
.SH FILES
.TP
.I models/sax_best.pt
Trained LSTM model weights (saxophone).
.TP
.I models/trumpet_best.pt
Trained LSTM model weights (trumpet).
.TP
.I config.py
All tunable parameters: MIDI port indices, input pitch range and
velocity filter, minimum note duration filter, tempo hint, silence
threshold, phrase length limits, self-play channel assignments,
generation temperature, and more.
.TP
.I data/processed/sax_sequences.npy
Prepared training sequences (generated by \fIdata/prepare.py\fR).
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.B python demo.py \-\-help
(feature-level testing without the arc),
.B python tools/echo_bass.py \-\-help
(echo bass phrases on the sax output for setup verification and warm-up),
.B python tools/analyse_midi.py \-\-help
(post-hoc analysis of self-play MIDI recordings).
.SH NOTES
Wolfson was created for a performance at Wolfson College, Oxford,
on 1 May 2026.  Training data from the Weimar Jazz Database,
Jazzomat Research Project, Hochschule für Musik Franz Liszt Weimar.
.SH AUTHOR
David De Roure <david.deroure@oerc.ox.ac.uk>
